 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

MEDICAL REPORT 

 

SOLICITOR'S REF 

AB/12/FGH/679 

INSTRUCTIONS FROM  Jones and Jones Solicitors 

CLIENT'S NAME   

John Finton 

ADDRESS   

 

98 Prescot Road, Macclesfield, Cheshire 

 

 

DOB   
 
DATE OF ACCIDENT 
 
DATE OF REPORT  

10 January 1978 

15 February 2010 

15 April 2010 

REVIEW OF NOTES 

None 

OCCUPATION 

 

Welder 

IDENTIFICATION  

Passport 

 

ACCIDENT 

At 2pm on 15 February 2010 Mr Finton was travelling in 

Macclesfield in a Nissan Almera fitted with seatbelts and 

headrests. He was the driver. Without warning whilst turning 

right another vehicle impacted with the rear of his vehicle. The 

impact to the other vehicle was to the front. 

 

MOVEMENT OF CLIENT ON IMPACT 

He suffered a forced flexion extension movement of his neck 

without rotation. 

 

IMMEDIATE SYMPTOMS 

He had no immediate symptoms. 

 

CHRONOLOGICAL PROGRESSION OF PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS 

The next day he developed pain in his neck and across his 

shoulders. He went to Green Bank Accident and Emergency 

Department where he was examined, no x-rays were taken and 

whiplash type injury was diagnosed. He was discharged with 

advice. The pain was severe for one week interfering with sleep 

and needing analgesics and then improved. He has had six sessions 

of physiotherapy which have proved helpful.  

 

CHRONOLOGICAL PROGRESSION OF PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS 

There have been no serious psychological symptoms associated with 

the accident. 

 

CURRENT SYMPTOMS AND TREATMENT 

He has intermittent pain in his left arm. 

 

PAST MEDICAL HISTORY 

He gives no past medical history of note. No previous history of 

accidents. No history of stress disorder or depression. No 

history of musculoskeletal problems.  

 

LOSS CONSEQUENTIAL TO INJURY 

He is a Welder and had two weeks off work following the accident. 

I would regard this as reasonable considering the nature of his 

injuries and the nature of his occupation. The accident had no 

other effect on his social or domestic life. 

 

EXAMINATION 

On examination he is a man of normal build with a normal gait. 

 

Examination of his upper limbs is normal. 

 

Examination of his cervical spine shows a full range of movement 

actively and passively in all directions. There was no muscular 

tenderness. 

 

Flexion extension of his lumbosacral spine was full. Straight leg 

raising was full. There was no spinal tenderness. 

 

There were no other marks, scars or bruises and no inappropriate 

responses.  

 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

As a result of a road traffic accident on 15 February 2010 Mr 

Finton sustained a whiplash injury to his cervical spine. The 

injuries sustained are compatible with the accident. There were 

no adverse features associated with the accident. Consequent to 

the accident he had severe pain in his neck and shoulders for one 

week which then improved. He is not yet asymptomatic in that he 

still has some residual intermittent pain in his right arm.  

 

Psychologically there has been no consequence of the accident. 

 

The accident caused him to have two weeks off work but did not 

otherwise interfere with his lifestyle. 

 

Examination shows that movement of his cervical spine and 

lumbosacral spine is full and pain free actively and passively in 

all directions. 

 

PROGNOSIS 

In my opinion on the balance of probability full physical 

recovery can be anticipated from the effects of the accident at a 

time within six months of the date of the accident. I base my 

opinion on the facts that recovery to date has been satisfactory, 

the range of movement of his cervical spine is full and there 

were no adverse features associated with the accident. 

 

I have no further recommendation regarding further 

investigations, specialist opinions or treatment. 

 

The Client is a good historian and his injuries are consistent 

with the accident. The injuries will have no long term effect on 

his future work prospects. 

 

The contents of this report are true to the best of my knowledge. 

 

REVIEW OF MEDICAL RECORDS 

The report has been compiled without access to his General 

Practitioner notes. In my opinion examination of the notes is not 

required as the Client is a good and reliable historian and the 

injuries sustained are compatible with the accident described. 

 

Declaration 

 

I am a general practitioner and have been a member of the Royal 

College of General Practitioners since 1968.  I have been in 

general practice since 1964. 

 

John Finton was seen by me on 15 April 2010.  The instruction was 

taken from Jones and Jones solicitors for the purpose of the 

preparation of this medico-legal opinion with regard to an 

accident on 15 February 2010. 

 

The opinion was prepared with the benefit of a clinical interview 

and clinical examination. 

 

I understand my duty is to the Court and this opinion has been 

compiled with the Duty Rule 35,10(2).  I understand the Expert’s 

duty is to help the Court on matters within my expertise. 

 

I confirm that I have made clear which facts and matters referred 

to in this report are within my own knowledge and which are not. 

Those that are within my own knowledge I confirm to be true. The 

opinions I have expressed represent my true and complete 

professional opinions on the matters to which they refer. 

 

I understand that my duty as expert witness is to the Court.  I 

have complied with that duty.  This report includes all matters 

relevant to the issues on which my expert evidence is given.  I 

have given details in this report of any matters which might 

affect the validity of this report. 

 
 
 
 

