The eyeball is a bilateral and spherical organ, which houses the structures responsible for vision. It lies in a bony cavity within the facial skeleton – known as the bony orbit.Anatomically, the eyeball can be divided into three parts – the fibrous, vascular and inner layers. In this article, we shall consider the anatomy of the eyeball in detail, and its clinical correlations.Layers of the EyeballThe eyeball is formed by three layers – fibrous, vascular and inner. Each of these layers has a specialised structure and function.FibrousThe fibrous layer of the eye is the outermost layer. It consists of the sclera and cornea, which are continuous with each other. Their main functions are to provide shape to the eye and support the deeper structures.The sclera comprises the majority of the fibrous layer (approximately 85%). It provides attachment to the extraocular muscles – these muscles are responsible for the movement of the eye. It is visible as the white part of the eye.The cornea is transparent and positioned centrally at the front of the eye. Light entering the eye is refracted by the cornea.VascularThe vascular layer of the eye lies underneath the fibrous layer. It consists of the choroid, ciliary body and iris:Choroid – layer of connective tissue and blood vessels. It provides nourishment to the outer layers of the retina.Ciliary body – comprised of two parts – the ciliary muscle and ciliary processes. The ciliary muscle consists of a collection of smooth muscles fibres. These are attached to the lens of the eye by the ciliary processes. The ciliary body controls the shape of the lens, and contributes to the formation of aqueous humorIris – circular structure, with an aperture in the centre (the pupil). The diameter of the pupil is altered by smooth muscle fibres within the iris, which are innervated by the autonomic nervous system. It is situated between the lens and the cornea.InnerThe inner layer of the eye is formed by the retina, its light detecting component. The retina is composed of two layers:Pigmented (outer) layer – formed by a single layer of cells. It is attached to the choroid and supports the choroid in absorbing light (preventing scattering of light within the eyeball). It continues around the whole inner surface of the eye.Neural (inner) layer – consists of photoreceptors, the light detecting cells of the retina. It is located posteriorly and laterally in the eye.Anteriorly, the pigmented layer continues but the neural layer does not – this is part is known as the non-visual retina. Posteriorly and laterally, both layers of the retina are present. This is the optic part of the retina.The optic part of the retina can be viewed during ophthalmoscopy. The centre of the retina is marked by an area known as the macula. It is yellowish in colour, and highly pigmented. The macula contains a depression called the fovea centralis, which has a high concentration of light detecting cells. It is the area responsible for high acuity vision. The area that the optic nerve enters the retina is known as the optic disc – it contains no light detecting cells.